Previously, I talked about Root-Cause Analysis and rudimentary Causal Ideas in the Toyota Production System and said I would discuss the role Causal DAGs play in building intuition, among other things. I haven’t forgotten those topics, but I need some more time to think about them. Today, we’re going to talk about curses.

In the play Agamemnon, Aeschylus introduces us to the myth of Cassandra of Troy. Apollo gives Cassandra the ability to foresee the future. However, after she denies the god’s romantic advances, Apollo curses her so that no one will believe her, even though all her prophecies turn out to be true.

This post is not about a Greek tragedy, however. But before we start talking about data-related curses, let me introduce a new topic: Anomaly Detection. The reason Root-Cause Analysis and Anomaly Detection are closely tied is that we need to know problems exist before we can find their root causes.

When doing Anomaly Detection, we usually implicitly assume that anomalies are rare; otherwise, someone would have already caught them. First, let me define what Anomaly Detection is. Some people describe it as the process of finding unusual data points. This definition is misleading. For starters, a single data-generating process can generate points that appear unusual but are not significantly different from the rest of the data. But to understand anomalies, we need to understand the related concept of outliers.

“An outlier is an observation which deviates so much from the other observations as to arouse suspicions that a different mechanism generated it.”

– Aggarwal

However, even if there’s a different mechanism generating the outliers we see in the data, that doesn’t mean those outliers are interesting; in other words, they might not warrant further practical action. For example, preventive maintenance on equipment can cause unusual sensor data points. This maintenance might have been scheduled weeks prior, and while we might need to make modeling adaptations, our Anomaly Detection system doesn’t need to issue alerts about it.

Causal Thinking is warranted in Anomaly Detection, since it’s our understanding of the data-generating process that determines what is interesting and what is not. As Richard McElreath puts it, “No causes in, nothing out”.

Even though there’s no consensus on the terms, and people use them interchangeably, we must distinguish Outliers (data generated by a different mechanism, perhaps noise) from Anomalies (outliers that are actionable and business-critical). All anomalies are outliers, but not all outliers are anomalies.

One of the first problems I encountered in my career as a Data Scientist was to do Anomaly Detection in sensor data. Both technical and social constraints dictated the choices I had available, and I will share tips on tackling some of the challenges I faced in future posts.

In a nutshell, I had almost no domain knowledge, no access to subject matter experts (SMEs), hundreds of variables, and datasets so large that even small samples posed challenges for my 100GB RAM cluster. Besides, Anomaly Detection is inherently an unsupervised problem that sometimes masquerades as a classification task. Even in the best-case scenario, where we have labels, we are dealing with Positive-Unlabeled (PU) Learning.

We can be sure an anomaly is an anomaly (if verified), but we can never be 100% certain that a ‘normal’ point isn’t just an anomaly we haven’t discovered yet. It also means that it is harder to differentiate between outliers and anomalies since we have no supervision to guide us.

Someone might call this “The Curse of the Data Scientist”: inheriting a massive dump of observational data with zero context and a mandate to perform magic. Not all Data Scientists in the company need extensive domain expertise, though. Data Science and Machine Learning Engineering rely on teamwork; estimation is a tricky business, too, and no one can excel at everything alone.

A skilled Data Scientist or ML Engineer, with proper guidance and training, should be able to work effectively with SMEs to extract insights from data in various situations. If you are already a Data Scientist and this concept is unclear, consider starting here.

Back to the point. Before my arrival, considerable effort was put into applying classical outlier detection methods, such as the Local Outlier Factor (LOF). I wasn’t comfortable with this approach, but lacked the technical expertise and communication skills to express myself most productively back then.

First of all, I have always felt uneasy about applying black-box Machine Learning methods without theoretical or domain expertise to support them. Methods such as LOF (available in scikit-learn and PyOD library) also assume i.i.d. data, which sensors clearly are not.

In Anomaly Detection, we also walk a thin line between false positives and false negatives. If your false-negative rate is too high, your system is barely functional, and if customers catch the anomalies on their own, they might stop using your product. On the other hand, if your false-positive rate is too high, you will likely create alert fatigue and, again, the customer might cancel the contract.

Today’s central topic, however, is another curse: the Curse of Dimensionality (watch this for a refresher). The Curse isn’t unique to Anomaly Detection, of course. For example, you might claim that out of the hundreds of variables I had, only a few were really important for the task at hand, and you would be right, but without SMEs’ assistance or labels, there was no easy way to separate the wheat from the chaff.

“In view of all that we have said in the foregoing sections, the many obstacles we appear to have surmounted, what casts the pall over our victory celebration? It is the Curse of Dimensionality, a malediction that has plagued the scientist from the earliest days.”

– Richard Bellman

Proximity methods, such as LOF, define locality using distance functions, but in high-dimensional spaces, distances become pathological because all pairs of points are approximately equidistant. Having several irrelevant dimensions doesn’t help to make the distances more meaningful either. The example below illustrates this phenomenon.

Similarly, outliers and anomalies can look completely fine from the marginal distribution point of view, and completely deviant from the joint distribution point of view. Here, I can segue into one of my main points: Data Visualization is a powerful technique, but it doesn’t scale. Your data viz is trapped in two, maybe three dimensions. You might try using faceted or layered charts, but it can quickly get complex. If you facet the data enough times, you risk fooling yourself by raising hypotheses based on plots of the data’s low-density regions.

Let me give you another example sampled from a multivariate normal distribution. Pay attention to the red star in the graph below; it doesn’t appear suspicious if you look at the marginals (see the boxplots), but it is clearly an outlier when looking at the joint. I know it for a fact, since I was the one who put it there.

At the same time, pay attention to the fact that some ‘normal’ points would have been classified as outliers in both marginal boxplots, too. In practice, the boxplot, the statistician’s favorite tool for detecting outliers, has a limited scope, and in most situations, we won’t be able to eyeball anomalies with charts alone.

This article by Richard Hahn articulates some ideas I’ve had throughout my career that are relevant to our discussion. The article discusses many topics, including the Bayesian Workflow, error control, and Falsifiability. But the ideas I want to emphasize today are iterative science, modeling to enhance EDA, and realistic expectations around Machine Learning.

“Making basic plots and acknowledging missing data and reformatting as necessary should be considered ‘preparatory analysis’ rather than ‘exploratory’”

– Richard Hahn

Bayesian methods are naturally suited to the type of exploratory analysis that Hahn mentioned in his article, given the Lego-like structure of probabilistic programming languages, the methods’ intrinsic capacity to incorporate prior information, and to quantify uncertainty. However, you are not bound to Bayes at all, and I will show you this later.

In my opinion, one of the most elegant ways to conceptualize the learning process is to see it as lossy data compression. Seeing models as nothing more than elaborate data compressors can help strip away some of the mystique around them. However, we can take this idea quite literally. Let me explain.

In Information Theory, there is a concept called the Manifold Hypothesis. It suggests that while your data might technically live in a very high-dimensional space, the meaningful “signal” actually lives on a much lower-dimensional shape (a manifold) embedded within that space. Think of it like a zipped file. If I can compress a 100MB text file down to 5MB without losing the story, it means the original file contained 95MB of redundancy.

In fact, many neural network architectures today consist of an encoder that compresses the input into a lower-dimensional representation (a latent space) and a decoder that reconstructs the original input from this compressed representation. But to stick with Hahn’s example of Bayesian Machine Learning, Bayesian methods usually “compress” the relationships in the dataset into samples from a posterior distribution over the parameters.

In this fashion, Anomaly Detection becomes a test of compressibility:

We build a model (a neural network, a PCA, etc., either Bayesian or not) that learns to “compress” the normal data onto that low-dimensional manifold.

We try to pass new data through that same compressor.

Normal data compresses well because it follows the rules the model learned.

Anomalies refuse to be compressed. They contain patterns the model hasn’t seen, resulting in high “reconstruction error”.

But as I was saying, I’ve used Bayesian Machine Learning only a few times in my professional career, but have adopted this information-theoretic view almost from the beginning. The unfortunate fact is that few people are familiar with the Bayesian Workflow, and I haven’t had enough time to introduce people to an entirely new approach and philosophy.

Tell me, what would you do if you found yourself in a situation like this? Nowadays, I approach problems differently, and I might talk about it at some point, but now I want to walk you through my thought process back then. For privacy reasons, I won’t disclose the company’s details and will use fake data, obviously.

In the next post, I will explain some of the tricks I’ve employed trying to solve Anomaly Detection in the context of Digital Signal Processing, back when I was still a Junior Data Scientist. We’re going to use the aforementioned information-theoretic mindset, progress iteratively, making scientifically reasonable decisions along the way, creating custom estimators tailored to our needs while using simulation to evaluate our steps. I also want to give you a glimpse of what a custom, high-quality ML experiment looks like, following scikit-learn conventions. Therefore, all code will be available on github.

References

 Outlier Analysis

Popper versus Tukey and the Battle for the Heart of Statistical Data Analysis

PyOD

Outlier detection with Local Outlier Factor (LOF)

Why we need causal Thinking for all data applications: Richard McElreath (Max Planck Institute)

Prior knowledge elicitation: The past, present, and future

Bayesian Workflow

Layered & Multi-View Charts

David Thompson (Part 2): Nearest Neighbors and the Curse of Dimensionality